Title: Tracing Techne  
Author: Michael Healy

In this web text I trace the rhetorical concept of *techne* through a corpus of rhetoric and composition field scholarship of the 1990s utilizing the digital humanities methods of topic modeling and data visualization. I undertook this project to explore intersections of creativity, invention, and text-technologies that emerged out of the 1990s and played a key role in recent approaches to digital rhetoric, multimodal composing, and circulation.

Underlying this project is an attention to data feminism and feminist rhetorical historiography. As a historiography this project traces impressions of *techne* in 1990s scholarship in order to recovery its history for rhetorical study. This project assumes that there are rhetorical actions that can be recovered through the uses of data, and that data can be used as a valuable historiographic intervention. This project also assumes that any recovery is a partial perspective. There is a careful feminist attention to power, language, and data within this project that aims to interrogate power within the scholarly record and within the data tools used to trace it. There is a critical attention to using data science methods with care in order to view the scholarly record from a different perspective.

I’m interested in the 1990s for a four reasons. The first is the influx of computer technology into writing classrooms and the subsequent increase in scholarship. The second is the emergence of the World Wide Web and changes culturally and on writing. Third, I’m interested in the influence of the social turn of the 1980s on the 1990s. Lastly, is a disciplinary impulse in the 1990s in rhetoric and composition that led to the professionalization of journals and academic publication.

----

The 1990s were a moment of immense change in culture and technology broadly, and of focus and disciplinarily in rhetoric and composition. The 1990s represent a full turn towards critical pedagogy brought about by the social turn, representing a shift in scholarship away from issues of process and cognition and towards issues of social critique and empowering students through literacy instruction (CITE Atwill and Lauer; Sirc). The 1990s were also a moment of disciplinary pressure in rhetoric and composition as the field worked towards crafting a defined identity for itself within the academy (CITE Fulkerson?). Within this context, topics important to issues of process such as invention and *techne* were subsumed in other conversations, undergoing a “diaspora” (Lauer) into other locations within scholarship.

However, issues of *techne* were not abandoned as more recent scholarship has taken up the term including Jonathon Alexander and Jackie Rhodes’s queer approaches to writing technology and the self, Pender’s re-historicizing of the term, and Susan Delagrange’s inquiry into the wunderkammer. These uptakes of *techne* bring with them assumptions of the concept, such as Aristotle’s art and craft of rhetoric, to re-conceptualize. 

Similarly, issues of invention have been subsumed under other discussions as noted by Janice Lauer and Janet Atwil. Rhetorical invention has been taken up within recent scholarship to…

The 1990s were also a moment of wrestling with disciplinary identy for rhetoric and composition.  This is most evident in the formalization of field based journals, most easily identified with the changes to *College Composition and Communication*. There is also the creation of more niche journals such *Kairos* alongside ongoing publication in journals such as *Computers and Composition* and *JAEPL*. These changes in publication, through an expansion of specilization, an increase in page-count, and the development of focus in journals represent disciplinary forces within rhetoric and composition that seems to be seeking legitimacy within the academy and a unique disciplinary identity emerging out of the field of study (Fulkerson?)

In approaching the 1990s through traditional database research methods, there are very few explicit mentions of *techne*. For example, using *CompPile*—a popular crowd-sourced database of scholarship in rhetoric and composition—to search for *techne* bounded to 1990-1999 returns nine results including an article in German and two doctoral thesis. Additionally, searches for invention and creativity—two concepts often closely aligned with *techne*—return 233 and 117 results. Discussion of technology are largely centered on the influence of computer technology in the teaching of composition, with some mentions of network and network writing. 

In doing this investigative analysis I have found that the concept of *techne* can be found within scholarship of the decade but that it is not explicitly mentioned. These impressions help scholars in rhetoric and composition understand the historiography of *techne* and better account for assumptions about the concept that emerge in use in more recent scholarship.

----

**Invention**

Invention is the rhetorical cannon concerned with generating approaches to a rhetorical situation including the “habits, artistic materials, and communicative modes through which rhetorical generation occurs” (Peter Simonson 2014, 314). It is an important concept for rhetoric given its role in making epistemological claims about writing. The late Janice Lauer traces an “inventional turn” that, during the 1990s, dispersed through many sites and perspectives (2004, 96-116), away from the efforts to categorize, theorize, and test elaborated theories of process and towards the knowledges made and expressed through invention (118). Invention has often been obscured by discussions of cultural critique and postmodern theory that shifted attention in the 1990s towards issues of social construction, ideology, and the origins of language. As discussed by both Kelly Pender and Byron Hawk, Richard Young’s work in the 1970s and 1980s on process theorized the labor of rhetoric and composition to be the work of invention, broadly understood, and saw *techne* as a means of connecting invention explicitly to writing (Hawk 2007, 27; Pender 2011, 39). Additionally, as Pender argues, invention and *techne* have been closely aligned within rhetoric and composition scholarship, shaping theory, practice, and pedagogies within the discipline while illuminating that *techne* is oftentimes under-theorized and under-utilized in that same scholarship (Pender 2011, 12). 

***Techne***

*Techne* is a concept from rhetorical studies that Aristotle defines as “the art and craft” of rhetoric. He argues that *techne* is a concept that helps us understand many human activities from rhetoric, to medicine, to arts and crafts. He compares work with rhetoric to that of a skilled artisan such as a potter. He argues that there are fundamental craft skills to master in order to perform rhetoric, but that there is also an intrinsic artistic element to it. Not only is there a transferable and learnable skill to rhetoric, but it can also transcend to the nature of art when done well. Techne also provides for an understanding of everyday rhetorical action and extraordinary rhetorical action.

*Techne* helps scholars understand what the material of rhetoric is, conceive of how it is shaped and molded, and to consider how to best teach the practice of rhetoric. Since Aristotle *techne* has been theorized and defined in a multitude of different ways, but all with a focus on the activity of rhetoric. Kelly Pender, in her 2011 book *Techne: From Neoclassicism to Postmodernism* suggests 5 composite definitions of *techne* “cluster(ed) around (…) epistemological and axiological positions” (16).

1. A “how-to” guide or handbook
2. A rational ability to effect a useful result
3. Means of inventing new social possibilities
4. A means of producing resources
5. Non-instrumental mode of bringing-forth

The in-betweenness that *techne* inhabits highlights explicit convergences of imagination and rhetorical practice inherent with acts of creation can be understood not as serendipity experienced by a certain few, but as a practice that can be learned, revised, recalled, and utilized (Pender 2011, 141). Additionally, as both Pender and Lauer have indicated, tensions between theories of invention and *techne* have left material traces within the scholarship and practices of rhetoric and composition. 

----

Given a lack of direct discussion of *techne* and invention from scholarship of the 1990s, I turned to a data curation methodology which relies on data feminism, a term partially coined by Catherine D’Ignazio and Lauren F. Klein, which presents a set of seven data principles for a feminist data ethic: examine power, challenge power, elevate emotion and embodiment, rethink binaries and hierarchies, embrace pluralism, consider context, and make labor visible (2020). By approaching data as a feminist practice with rhetorical attitudes that resist closure and historical erasing, data curation focuses on differences and gaps and as Patricia Sullivan and Tarez Samra Graban argue, allows for a revisiting of views for “understanding of how groups of rare artifacts or texts could have functioned together more broadly” (Sullivan and Graban 2011, 7). 

Data curation builds from the following assumptions: that textual data analysis can be used to trace an absence of explicit discussion, that this tracing is a partial perspective, that tracing an intersection must account for difference, and that a re-seeing through curation and visualization can be used to make arguments about the current state of the discipline. Approaching data curation as an embodied historiographic process (Graban and Sullivan 2018, 189-207) that tells a story of the field’s communities through selected, visualized, and presented data and discourses, can be an important act of recovery through reconnecting information with bodies, data with discourse, and historicity with disciplinarity. 

----

In undertaking the investigative data analysis I gathered a corpus of rhetoric and composition field journals from the 1990s. I utilize two methods drawn from the digital humanities, topic modeling and data visualization. This allows for a view of the corpus that is available at scale through distant reading and seeing trends over time through data visualization. I then use this scale to suggest places to read specific articles from the corpus to develop a historiography of *techne.* 

I gathered a corpus of nine field journals that serve rhetoric and composition and cover both broad developments in the discipline as well as more niche interests in pedagogy, creativity, and technology.

1. College Composition and Communication
2. College English
3. Computers and Composition
4. Journal of Advanced Composition
5. Journal for the Assembly for Expanded Perspectives on Learning
6. Kairos
7. Rhetoric Review
8. Rhetoric Society Quarterly
9. Writing on the Edge


The corpus was collected manually through web scraping for *Kairos*, *Computers and Composition*, and *JAEPL*, and through a Data-For-Research request through JSTOR for the remaining journals. The resulting data was then cleaned to put metadata and citations for each article into a common JSON format, and to prepare the full-text data for analysis. I used the general-purpose programming language Python and the tool Jupyter notebooks to develop the data cleaning, analysis, and visualization programs and to annotate their function.

Topic modeling is a computational approach to natural language processing. Through a combination of computational power and statistical analysis, topic modeling generates a list of highly plausible topics that can be inferred and read in relationship to a corpus. Clay Templeton argues that it can be used as a form of distant reading where identification of topics emerge from texts in response to a subjective reading of the generated lists of words (Templeton). (Demonstrate the topic model briefly)

Data visualization are processes for transforming data into visual forms that can more easily be read and comprehended, especially for a broad audience. For Krista Kennedy and Seth Long, data visualization offers new ways of examining the material traces of concepts such as techne within scholarship which “can benefit from large textual data sets” through its ability to develop a “more complex view that is simply not possible to attain at a smaller scale” (Kennedy and Long 2015, 142).

Once the corpus was prepared for analysis, I used the tool *Mallet* to develop topic models drawn from the text of the corpus. Topic models are a form of distant reading that weighs two things in its analysis: how frequently words appear near each other across the entire corpus, and then how frequently those groupings of words may be found within a particular document. It makes an assumption that meaning can be inferred through these groupings of words as drawn from a corpus, and that these groupings suggest the content of any particular document by examining the statistical distribution of topics within individual documents. While topic modeling is not a perfect representation of keyword relationships—because it cannot discern the meaning or usage of the terms, only their frequency within documents alongside the other words in the same topic—using this method has enabled me to infer topical relationships around *techne* based on the likelihood or rarity of particular words occurring together in various combinations across this corpus.

I then cross referenced and visualized the topics utilizing Pender’s five composite definitions of *techne*, reading to match and highlight any that aligned with any one of the composition definitions. Topic modeling provides statistical weights for the appearance of each topic within every document of the corpus which I used to generate visualizations. I created these visualizations using the programing language Python along with the open source libraries Bokeh and Pandas. This particular visualization is of the mean weights for identified topics found within a snapshot of the corpus comprised of documents that included the word “invention.” I used these visualizations to “see” the topic models and to search for places where impressions of *techne* could be found within documents and can trace its absences through the scholarship of the decade through these impressions. The investigative data analysis was then used to suggest areas for closer reading and recovery based out of the corpus, examining individual articles for the impressions of *techne*. 


----

For this project I developed topics models for the entire corpus and for a subset of documents that had an explicit mention of invention, as I was interested in the rhetorical cannon of invention.

Through modeling and tracing the corpus, I found *techne* throughout the scholarship of the 1990s with 58 explicit instances of the string of letters “techne” being found within the full text of the corpus. Many of these articles deal with specific recoveries of rhetorical theory or action, often undertaken to apply a past theory to a technological composition issue such as the use of word processors. An example of this type of article is Keith Dorwick’s “Rethinking the Academy: Problems and Possibilities of Teaching, Scholarship, Authority, and Power in Electronic Environments.” Others focus on a specific classical rhetorical theory or theorist with a focus on reconceptualizing or reconsidering that theory in this specific context. For example Bruce McComiskey’s “Disassembling Plato's Critique of Rhetoric in the Gorgias (447a-466a)” and Ramsey Eric Ramsey’s “A Hybrid Technê of the Soul?: Thoughts on the Relation between Philosophy and Rhetoric in Gorgias and Phaedrus.” A third type of article with explicit mentions of *“*techne” involve specific writing praxis where fields of study such as professional writing are considered or issues of pedagogy are discussed. Some examples of these articles include Thomas P. Miller’s “Treating Professional Writing as Social Praxis” and Theresa L. Ebert’s “For a Red Pedagogy: Feminism, Desire, and Need.”

However, I am interested in where else assumptions and impressions of *techne* could be found within the corpus without the explicit appearance of the string of letters “techne.” This absence of *techne* would show up as “impressions” of *techne* in the topic models that I interpreted as a place where its not quite there but it could be read as aligning with a composite definition. These impressions of *techne* are embedded within other topics, such as creativity, social critique, and technology, and within documents with titles that would not indicate inclusions of a discussion regarding *techne*. 

I then worked to examine impressions of *techne* alongside explicit instances of the string “invention.” I chose the search “invention” due to my interest in the rhetorical cannon of invention given its strong historical and theoretical association with *techne*. This subset of the corpus resulted in 544 unique articles which included the string “invention” within the text in some fashion. I then generated a 50 topic models from this selection and interpreted 19 topics as aligning with a compound definition of *techne* in some way. The list of generated topics can be found in table 1.

----

Tracing impressions of *techne* where they appear alongside explicit mentions of the strong “invention” paints a nuanced picture of the history of *techne* within topics explicitly aligned towards issues of rhetorical and technological invention. The topics identified have a number of readings concerned with the practical application of rhetoric suggesting a rich variety of scholarship that can be drawn upon when considering *techne* and invention. There are also trends in these impressions towards the use of particular resources, such as handbooks, when considering *techne* and the reconsidering of Ancient Greek and Roman rhetorical theory and practice. With these impressions there are three main findings. First, that these impressions largely support existing field histories. Second, histories of *techne* are carried out for two historiographic impulses in authorization and recovery. Third, that looking at impressions rather than direct theorization enriches rhetorical historiographic work.

First, this project supports the narrative of the 1990s as being primarily concerned with the issues of the social turn and postmodern critique, especially within dominant journals. Even when specialty concerns were brought up in more niche journals such as *JAEPL* and *Kairos*, they were framed within discussions of subjectivity, ideology, and social critique. Second, these tracings supports disciplinary histories such as Richard Fulkerson’s that point to continued professionalization and specialization of the field, with impressions of *techne* backing assumptions about the value of teaching and researching writing in particular contexts. However, *techne* was found as an impression within these professionalizing conversations and not as a primary area of historical focus. The continued specialization supports Lauer’s argument that invention scattered into a “diaspora of composition areas,” (2002, 2) where discussions of invention were contained within professionalizing focuses. The tracing of impressions of *techne* within the scholarship of the decade helped situate its obscured but important placement, and that it is historicized alongside other concerns. 

Second, my study also suggests that histories of *techne* and invention have been largely undertaken for two historiographic impulses: authorization and recovery. First, as drawn from Ryan Skinnell, authorizing histories of *techne* framed an action, pedagogy, or epistemology within a tradition typically as a broadening narrative in the history rhetoric and composition, and to authorize some approach within that longer tradition (Skinnell 2015, 112). Authorizing histories of *techne* were most frequently found alongside discussions of invention and pedagogy and tended to feature topics that discussed the application of particular rhetorical theory and theorists. 

For example, histories of authorization of *techne*, whether explicit or implied, provide a framework for contextualizing and historicizing a certain re-readings of historical figures and canonical texts for a basis of current action, evident in topics relating to Burke, Plato, Aristotle, and Habermas. In authorizing *techne*, documents such as “A Historicist Recontextualization of the Enthymeme” by Carol Poster re-situates uptakes of enthymemes and sophistic rhetoric for contemporary concerns. This, along with other authorizing narratives, connected theories and pedagogies to an intellectual history, building disciplinary legitimacy.

The second historiographic impulse of recovery ultimately has similar goals to those of authorization but, as Michelle Bailiff argues, they work towards an expansion of what counts for the discipline and as a history of rhetoric (Balliff 2012, 1). These histories of recovery included topics that aligned with particular traditions and figures, and tend to feature the redefining of theory through the recovery of a figure or tradition, often with broader rhetorical goals including expanding feminist rhetorics and the reclaiming the sophists. Histories of recovery of *techne* tended towards topics where a specific overlooked rhetor, text, or tradition is brought forward into contemporary scholarship to broaden what counts as history and what should be included within rhetoric. A salient example of this type of history is “Friendly Dress: A Disciplined Use” by Carol Mattingly which focuses on how female Quaker speakers used reporting on their appearance in newspapers as an intentional rhetorical strategy. This article is itself situated within a number of other articles recovering a variety of figures, and in turning towards overlooked rhetorical traditions and to frame current practices. 

When modeling the corpus, both of these historiographies tended operate at two different levels, authorizing at a macro level which tends to examine major movements in order to make authorizing claims about the discipline as a whole, and recovery at a micro level that tends to examine the local and specific, looking to make smaller recoveries in support of marginalized traditions or an expansion of a local context. An examination of history through a trace of *techne* illustrates how historiographic impulses and scales operate for different purposes in the discipline and are often employed to address different question about the nature of invention and *techne*. While diffuse and obscured, there is an abundance of discussions around *techne* and invention that is often embedded within other conversations.

These two historiographies of authorization and recovery are contextualized within a discipline focused on social construction and critique in the 1990s. As Geoffrey Sirc laments, the 1990s were a decade of “conservative professionalism” (2002, 32) that focused on using the potentials of postmodernism and linguistic play to better critique others and to secure a spot within the academy instead of an opening up of possibilities after process in *techne*. With the importation of critical theory into rhetoric and composition, invention appeared to become buried under these critical perspectives which John Muckelbauer argues bridges postmodern and social concerns between creation and discovery (Muckelbauer 2008, 13). Tracing *techne* suggests approaching the diffusion of interests brought about by professionalization and specialization as an opportunity to theorize the distributed impacts and histories of *techne*, and to reevaluate the value that has been placed on invention within these contexts. This project considers a *techne* that is more enriched for uptake in disciplinary conversations, and the results suggest enriching our current histories. Both authorizing and recovering narratives are important for consideration within the histories of the discipline, and we might recoup histories of invention through tracing at both micro and macro scales.

----

Working with data from a rich textual data set such a disciplinary scholarship is a flattening move in that it reduces the rich content and context of articles into sets of words as topics. It also relies upon my own interpretation of those topics to derive meaning from them, because on their own all they reveal is statistical features of their appearance together. The data feminist principals of embrace pluralism, consider context, and make labor visible especially important in my performance of this methodology, reminding me to consider that the topic models are perspectives on the corpus, and are partial views, and to return to the underlying documents and narratives that are in conversation with the data. Furthermore, feminist data curation directs my attention towards issues of representation within data and encouraged me to look for places where impressions of techne can be found within the narratives of individuals and the recovery of voices that have been outside of the mainstream. I found that data curation encouraged me to use the data to support a multiplicity of positions and to seek impressions of techne within unexpected places.

Data curation helped me center the idea that I’m working with impressions, and that a more complete work through this history would rely upon more fine-grained and sustained analysis of the corpus and the types of texts that it represents. Data curation also encourages iterative reflection and a justification for choices and helped to account for the personal behind the data. I found that it helped to bridge between the two types of historiographies, recovery and authorization. One of the benefits of data curation is the ability and necessity of looking at things at multiple scales and perspectives at once which allows for the recovery of techne that had been obscured while also providing a narrative of authorization and continuity. This project also has implications for utilizing data curation for other types of digital humanities projects in rhetoric and composition. Data curation also offers a methodological intervention for historiography by offering a means of using computational visualization and big-data tools in the work of tracing and using data alongside narratives to craft history. A critical stance is necessary with this approach, and data curation is rooted in a feminist data ethic that first questions the role of people in the creation and application of data. I see data curation as being a valuable methodological intervention for the discipline where tracing of difficult concepts in a large textual dataset could be useful. It offers a set of perspectives and critical questions that can be usefully applied in a variety of contexts. I think that it also has implications for how we might consider the teaching of complex and diffuse concepts within rhetoric and composition and could be useful in a number of educational contexts through making implicit knowledge explicit for students in rhetoric and composition.