---
layout: page.liquid
title: Introduction
---

We find ourselves wrestling as a field with generative AI and the effects of large language models on writing pedagogy and theory. When a machine learning algorithm creates a-rhetorical hallucinations, with a great deal of clarity, something that sounds and looks a lot writing, it begs the question what is writing? Combined with disciplinary pressures to claim expertise over a domain of knowledge, it is important to return to what we mean when we consider techne and the relationships of techne to writing theory and practice. The end product, while important rhetorically, is not what writing is or is about. We value the thinking, learning, process, technology, social relationships, and cultures of writing. It is about how this activity is used and shared with other people. Historiographically interrogation techne suggests ways in which might start to re-situate processes and pedagogies in response to this moment.

I find the 1990s interesting for its lasting influence on questions of disciplinarity and rhetorical conceptions of writing in curriculums and pedagogy. Looking back at the 1990s with its influence of another major turn, the so-called “social” turn of the 1980s (Trimbur 1994, 109), and the importing of computerized technology into the teaching of writing, invites a recouping of techne for use in our current moment. I was particularly interested in that ambiguous space where writing gets started, those inventive and creative moments. I set out on a historiographic project that was interested in the interactions of invention, creativity, and text-technologies and the influence of 1990s scholarship on current theories and practices. So, I set out to do some searches in academic databases such as _CompPile_, _JSTOR_, and _Ebscohost_. What I found was the same issues that Janet Atwil and Janice Lauer noted in their introduction to Perspectives on Rhetorical Invention. What I found was _techne_, and that in the 1990s, that just like theories of invention _techne_ was everywhere and nowhere.

The 1990s were a moment of immense change in culture and technology broadly, and of focus and disciplinarity in rhetoric and composition. The 1990s represent a full turn towards critical pedagogy brought about by the social turn, representing a shift in scholarship away from issues of process and cognition and towards issues of social critique and empowering students through literacy instruction (CITE Atwill and Lauer; Sirc). The 1990s were also a moment of disciplinary pressure in rhetoric and composition as the field worked towards crafting a defined identity for itself within the academy (CITE Fulkerson?). Within this context, topics important to issues of process such as invention and *techne* were subsumed in other conversations, undergoing a “diaspora” (Lauer) into other locations within scholarship.

However, issues of *techne* were not abandoned as more recent scholarship has taken up the term including Jonathon Alexander and Jackie Rhodes’s queer approaches to writing technology and the self, Pender’s re-historicizing of the term, and Susan Delagrange’s inquiry into the wunderkammer. These uptakes of *techne* bring with them assumptions of the concept, such as Aristotle’s art and craft of rhetoric, to re-conceptualize.

The 1990s were also a moment of wrestling with disciplinary identity for rhetoric and composition.  This is most evident in the formalization of field based journals, most easily identified with the changes to *College Composition and Communication*. There is also the creation of more niche journals such *Kairos* alongside ongoing publication in journals such as *Computers and Composition* and *JAEPL*. These changes in publication, through an expansion of specialization, an increase in page-count, and the development of focus in journals represent disciplinary forces within rhetoric and composition that seems to be seeking legitimacy within the academy and a unique disciplinary identity emerging out of the field of study (Fulkerson?)

In approaching the 1990s through traditional database research methods, there are very few explicit mentions of *techne*. For example, using *CompPile*—a popular crowd-sourced database of scholarship in rhetoric and composition—to search for *techne* bounded to 1990-1999 returns nine results including an article in German and two doctoral thesis. Additionally, searches for invention and creativity—two concepts often closely aligned with *techne*—return 233 and 117 results. Discussion of technology are largely centered on the influence of computer technology in the teaching of composition, with some mentions of network and network writing. 

In doing this investigative analysis I have found that the concept of *techne* can be found within scholarship of the decade but that it is not explicitly mentioned. These impressions help scholars in rhetoric and composition understand the historiography of *techne* and better account for assumptions about the concept that emerge in use in more recent scholarship.

<div class="inline_nav">
<p><a href="/">Previous</a>|<a href="/michael.healy/literature_review/">Next</a></p></div>